# Pareto Distributions

The fastest successful linear searches on unordered data occur when the data being searched for is located at the beginning of the data set. You can ensure that a successfully found data item will be found quickly in the future by moving it to the beginning of a data set after it has been found in a search. The concept behind this strategy is that we can minimize search times by locating items that are frequently searched for at the beginning of a data set. For example, if you are a librarian and you are asked several times a day for the same reference book, you will keep that book close to your desk for easy access. After many searches, the most frequently searched-for items will have moved from wherever they were stored to the beginning of the data set. This is an example of _self-organized data_: data that is organized not by the programmer before the program is executed, but by the program itself while the program is running. It makes sense to allow your data to self-organize since the data being searched most likely follow the “80-20 rule,” meaning that 80% of the searches made on a data set are searching for just 20% of the data in the set. Self-organization will eventually put that 20% at the beginning of the data set, where a simple linear search will find them quickly. Probability distributions such as the 80-20 rule are called Pareto distributions, named for Vilfredo Pareto, who discovered these distributions studying the spread of income and wealth in the late 19th century. See _The Art of Computer Programming: Volume 3, Sorting and Searching_ by Donald Knuth (Addison-Wesley, 399-401) for more information on probability distributions in data sets.
